# InnerSource Learning Path Script: Trusted Committer

## Introduction of speakers

- D: tbd

- G: My name is Georg Gr√ºtter. I am a software developer and an InnerSource
  Evangelist at Robert Bosch in Germany and I was a Trusted Committer in one of
  our InnerSource communities for many years.

## Introducing The Trusted Committer Role

D: The Trusted Committer (TC) role is one of the key roles in an InnerSource
community. It is both a challenging and a rewarding role to fulfill. It goes
far beyond being an opinionated gatekeeper and it is instrumental for the 
success of any InnerSource community.  

G: Generally speaking, the TC role is defined by its responsibilities, rather
than by its privileges. On a very high level, a TC represents the interests of
both their InnerSource community and the products the community is building.
She is concerned with the health of the community and the product. So as a TC,
you'll have both tech oriented and community oriented responsibilities and
we'll explore both of these dimensions in the following sections. 

D: Before we go into the details of what a TC actually does, let's spend some
time contrasting the TC role to other roles in IS and why we think the name is
both apt and important.

G: There are three major roles in an InnerSource community: The contributor,
the trusted committer and, depending on the type of community, a product owner.

D: The Contributor, as the name suggests, makes contributions.  She might or
might not be part of the community - sometimes they come from another part of
the organization to develop a feature for it.  This is why in InnerSource, we
sometimes refer to contributors as _guests_. It is the responsibility of the
contributor to "fit in" and conform to the communities expectations and
processes - to honor the house rules, so to speak.

G: The Trusted Committers, on the other hand, are, among other things, 
responsible for setting and enacting these rules. This is why TCs are sometimes
referred to as hosts. They are responsible to make sure their guests are
comfortable and can make the most of their time spent in the community. In
comparison to the contributor, a TC has more rights. She can push code closer
to production and she is generally allowed to perform tasks that have a higher
level of risk associated with them. A TC is at the center of an InnerSource 
project and thus collaborates with both the contributors and the Product Owner.

D: The Product Owner (PO) is responsible for defining and prioritizing
requirements and stories for the community to implement. Together with the PO,
she will e. g. determine, if a feature donated by a contributor actually
belongs to the product she is responsible for. Depending on the type of 
InnerSource community, there might or might not be a Product Owner.

G: The role of the product owner will be explained in more detail in a
dedicated learning path video.
